A case of business burglary is being investigated following a break-in at Edgars store in High Street that took place between 5.27pm on Monday 4 March and 1.22am the next day, police spokesperson Captain Mali Govender reports. “At about 1.22am the manager was phoned by their security company because the alarm was going off in the shop,” Govender said. “The manager rushed to the shop and on arrival she found that the front door had been smashed open with a big rock. Clothing and cosmetics to the value of R112 900 were stolen.” No arrests have been made and any person who can assist with information about the incident should contact their local SAPS or the crime stop number on 0860 010 111. A case of house robbery and attempted murder was opened after a 59-year-old man was attacked in his home near the Albany sports fields around 10am on Sunday 3 March. Police spokesperson Captain Mali Govender said the man was woken up by a noise in his bedroom. He saw a young man standing in front of his bed with a knife in his hand and another at his front door. “The complainant ran towards the suspect, who was in his room,” Govender said. “The suspect stabbed the victim on his forearm.” A fight ensued with the man taking on both men – both with knives and both trying to stab him. “The complainant grabbed both the suspects and managed to grab one of the knives,” Govender said. He pushed both of his attackers against the motorbikes standing on his stoep, ran out of the house and called out for help from the neighbours. They came to help and followed the two men running away. Hi-Tec security arrived and also followed the suspects along the railway line. The two suspects were later apprehended by the security company and arrested by the police, Govender said. “Cellphones belonging to the complainant, and some cash, were found in the possession of the suspects.” The man, who had sustained a wound on his arm, was taken to hospital for his injuries to be treated. A man accused of rape and a couple appearing on trafficking charges appeared in the Magistrate’s Court in Makhanda on Monday 4 March. According to police spokesperson Captain Mali Govender, the allegations are that two friends fetched the complainant from her home on 26 January 2019 and left her at the home of the accused, who paid them. According to the charge sheet, he then took the complainant to his bedroom and had sexual intercourse with her without her consent. “She screamed for help but there was no one else in the house,” Govender said. The man had then unlocked the door. The complainant had left and later reported the incident to her boyfriend. The case was remanded to 27 May. A 36-year-old Adelaide man was arrested on Thursday 7 March on charges of dealing in drugs and cultivation of dagga plants, police spokesperson Captain Mali Govender reports. Govender said he was found in possession of 24 small dagga plants, 4 big dagga plants, 69 grams of loose dagga and cash to the amount of R2 892. In Bedford, a shop owner aged 34 was arrested on charges of possession of dagga when he was found with 377 grams of loose dagga. The arrests were made during an Intelligence driven operation held in the Adelaide and Bedford policing areas by members of the Operational Command Centre, K9 unit and Highway Patrol in Cradock. “The Cradock Cluster Commander, Brigadier Madoda Zamkana, once again wants to sensitise the communities that the cultivation and selling of dagga still remains an criminal offence,” Govender said. “He also urges the community to come forward with information to ensure that our communities live in a safe and secure environment.” 