Commander of the South African Army Infantry Formation, Major General Rudzani Maphwanya, presented medals to 6SAI members at the 20 Years Service parade at the Army base on Thursday 4 April 2019. At the parade grounds, Officer Commanding 6 South African Infantry Battalion Lieutenant-Colonel MA Saki also welcomed several other guests of honour who ranged from Mayor of Makana Municipality, Mzukisi Mpahlwa, to Makhanda boxing star, All Africa welterweight champion Mziwoxolo ‘General’ Ndwayana. There were 28 recipients named for the Good Service Medal: 20 Years and 12 for the 10-year medal. Both recognise members of the full-time force who have distinguished themselves by good conduct and loyal service. The Itshumelo Ikatelaho Medal was awarded to two soldiers: Lance-Corporal Zingisile Mkloko and Mncediswa Yoyo. The medal is for SANDF members who distinguished themselves by rendering military service directly in support of a military operation. Privates Axola Fundani, Silulami Gqozo and Mlungisi Tshunungwa received the Mandela Medal. This, according to the citation, is for “conspicuous service while personally providing medical care and attention to former President Mandela during his final illness”, or managing an aspect of the memorial service, laying in state and state funeral of the former commander in chief. Private Mawande Ntsangani was the sole recipient of the AU Medal. This is awarded to SANDF members who have completed the requirements of eligibility and necessary period of qualifying service as a military member in the African Union Mission. In his address, Maphwanya described the 6SAI members as a strategic asset that needed to be nurtured. “This unique unit has always risen above expectations in their effort to deliver any task entrusted to them,” Maphwanya said. “Today’s parade is an acknowledgement to our members who have excelled in their sacred duty as part of the South African Army in their various working environments. “These medals have been issued to these men and women for the great work that they’ve done and their commitment to serving the people of South Africa. The medals acknowledge their individual contribution to our country and our democracy. It is a story of selflessness and commitment to defend the lives of our people. Maphwanya quoted the late former commander-in-chief, Nelson Mandela, saying, “Everyone can rise above their circumstances if they are dedicated and passionate about what they do.” “As the defenders of our democracy, may we continue to be inspired by Madiba’s words,” Maphwanya said. Maphwanya said the future looked bright, despite the economic crunch forcing drastic reductions in SANDF budgets. “Few have chosen this noble path,” Maphwanya said. “Ours is not a job, but a calling in the service of others… You are carrying the hopes and aspirations of our people. Continue to be a beacon of hope as the last line of defence.” “These men and women have given their best without expecting anything in return. Theirs is to serve and, if need be, to die for their country.” Ndwayana received a special mention for his successful defence last weekend of his title. He and his father (who is also his manager), Bulelani Ndwayana, were among those in the VIP tent, and at a special reception afterwards. The South African Army Infantry Formation supervises all infantry within the South African Army. Its Commander is Major General Rudzani Maphwanya. A wreath-laying ceremony to honour fallen soldiers is scheduled to take place on Friday 5 April at the unit cenotaph at the Army base.