 Nicola Ralston Caroline Shuter Diocesan School for Girls Dux scholar, Nicola Ralston (Port Elizabeth), has been placed on the IEB Merit list for Outstanding Achievement. This means she is placed in the top 5% nationally across six subjects and attained a Level 7 for Life Orientation. Nicola was also the top IEB matriculant in the Eastern Cape. Caroline Shuter (Johannesburg) was placed in the top 1% nationally in three subjects: Geography, Life Sciences and Mathematics. Avia Rapapis Emma Brockwell Caroline Cotton The following girls achieved a full house of Seven Distinctions: Emma Brockwell (Bedford); Caroline Cotton (Grahamstown); Nicola Ralston (Port Elizabeth); Avia Repapis (Grahamstown) and Caroline Shuter (Johannesburg).  Kate Allanson Caydn Barker Sasha Domnick Julia Kirkpatrick Kelly-Anne Shaw Teagan Thompson        A further six girls attained six distinctions. They were: Kate Allanson (Port Elizabeth); Caydn Barker (Grahamstown); Sasha Domnick (Johannesburg); Julia Kirkpatrick (Johannesburg); Kelly-Anne Shaw (Botswana) and Teagan Thompson (Port Elizabeth). Kate McMaster Carla Norris Julia Parton Kesia van der Merwe Olivia Wright     Five girls attained five distinctions: Kate McMaster (Cape Town); Carla Norris (Kenya); Julia Parton (Cape Town); Kesia van der Merwe (Grahamstown) and Olivia Wright (Grahamstown). Eleven girls attained four distinctions and a further 12 achieved three. In addition to this, the DSG girls attained an outstanding 230 subject distinctions and 233 B symbols. This means that 38% of all symbols achieved by the 86 candidates were distinctions and 39% were B symbols. “We are proud of our academic record which I know can be largely attributed to the strong work ethic among our pupil body, good parental support and a well-trained, committed and dedicated academic staff. I congratulate the entire team,” said Principal Shelley Frayne. The following girls have been placed in the top 1% in the country for individual subjects:
Geography: Caroline Shuter and Kelly-Anne Shaw
IsiXhosa First Additional Language: Ntombizethu Mpahla and Achumile Sintwa
Life Sciences: Caroline Shuter
Mandarin Second Additional Language: Yingge Wang
Mathematical Literacy: Victoria Barnes
Mathematics: Caydn Barker and Caroline Shuter