The 2018 St Andrew’s College Matrics achieved a 100% pass rate, and all the boys have qualified to study at tertiary level for degree (96%) or diploma (4%) courses. The 103 College boys who wrote the exam achieved a total of 153 subject distinctions. 11 514 candidates wrote the National Senior Certificate through the IEB this year with a 98,92% pass rate nationally. Daniel Erasmus Daniel Erasmus, from Port Elizabeth, achieved eight distinctions (7 IEB distinctions and one A Level distinction). “Daniel’s incisive mind, sporting and cultural prowess and achievements, and his ability to organise his time in order to pack as much productive work into every single day for five years, was simply awe-inspiring and remarkable,” the school said in a media release. Daniel was placed in the top 1% of all the IEB candidates who wrote Accounting, Mathematics and Physical Science. In addition, he was placed on the IEB Commendable List for candidates who achieved results in the top 5% in five subjects (and received 80% for Life Orientation). Jonathan Gouws Peter Jarvis Grahamstown pupils Jonathan Gouws and Head of School, Peter Jarvis, both achieved a full house of seven IEB distinctions. Kieron Baart and Alistair Ferguson each achieved six distinctions. Scott Cuthbert, Nathan Graham and Geir Wilson each achieved five distinctions. Kieron Baart Angus Ferguson Scott Cuthbert Nathan Graham Geir Wilson Sanele Mboto Oscar Liss         Daniel, Jonathan, Peter, Kieron, Scott and Geir are joined by Sanele Mboto and Oscar Liss in achieving A Aggregates. James Baker, Jonathan Campbell and Geir Wilson were placed in the top 1% of all the candidates nationally who wrote Mathematical Literacy. Of all the subject results, 21% were above 80%, 55% above 70%, and 80% of the results were above 60%. Below are the percentages of boys who achieved distinctions in each subject: The school also acknowledged the following boys who achieved results in the 90s “because it takes unusual single-mindedness and determination to achieve mastery at this level”. Accounting: Daniel Erasmus (99%)
Design: Oscar Liss (92%)
Information Technology: Jonathan Gouws (93%)
isiXhosa FAL: Sibabalwe Vabaza (93%), Sanele Mboto (92%)
Mathematics: Kieron Baart (92%), Scott Cuthbert (92%), Daniel Erasmus (98%), Jonathan Gouws (96%), Peter Jarvis (90%), Oscar Liss (91%), Andrew Smith (91%)
Mathematical Literacy: James Baker (94%), Jonathan Campbell (94%), Nicholas de Jager (92%), Callum Skinner (91%), James Waddell (93%) and Geir Wilson (94%)
Music: Daniel Erasmus (90%)
Physical Science: Daniel Erasmus (94%)
Visual Arts: Andrè Renaud (92%)   Language, Geography, Life Orientation, Mathematics, Physical Sciences  Music, Physical Sciences  Mathematics, Physical Sciences  Physical Sciences  Mathematics, Physical Sciences  Mathematical Literacy, Visual Arts  Mathematics  Mathematics  Orientation  The school also acknowledged boys who had improved significantly on their Grade 11 Promotion Mark aggregate:   Phillip Akoragye                      Geir Wilson                             Alistair Ferguson Lwandile Nyati  Dane van Duren                      Isaac Kagwanja                       Alexander Gess Mulima Mondoloka                Tadeusz Orzechowski              Andrew Ramsden Joseph Fisher                          Brad Landrey                           Mangaliso Bala Callum Bowes                         Michael Martin                       Jacques Hoefnagels Lukholo Mgudlwa                   Nicholas de Jager                    Thabo Sifumba Gareth de Vos                         Lwazi Mzamane                      Daniel Fry Oliver Hoard                           Callum Skinner                        Anele Dondolo Ryan Thompson                      Luke Stevens                           Ricky Scher Ovo Ntsham                            Edmund Guppy                       James Plumbridge Wilder McNutt  Alan Thompson Headmaster Alan Thompson said, “I am delighted with this year’s Matric results. They not only reflect some outstanding achievements at the top, but also provide some inspiring examples of what is possible when good attitude meets with a great work ethic. There have been some notable improvements throughout the year which have culminated really positively here. “The Matric class of 2018 has been a truly exceptional group of boys. They have given of themselves generously over many years and enjoyed much success in their time at College. They have finished a good year very well indeed, with an excellent set of academic results that reflect that positive approach. “Of course, a great end to the academic year does not come about by chance. It reflects the hard work of many -boys, staff, and parents – all working together to create excellence in this place. I record my grateful thanks to a great team for a job done well!”