In a press briefing this afternoon 18 February, Makana Executive Mayor Mzukisi Mpahlwa and Gift of the Givers hydrologist Dr Gideon Groenewald confirmed that the search for useable groundwater in Makhanda (Grahamstown) has begun. Groenewald stated that Gift of the Givers began the mapping and exploration process of Makhanda’s existing boreholes this morning, and hoped to strike ‘liquid gold’ by this evening. Mpahlwa said Makana had a comprehensive plan for the future. Should Settlers and Howieson’s Poort dams fall below pumping levels the west side of town would be switched to the James Kleynhans system. He confirmed that James Kleynhans was currently able to supply 10 megalitres per day but that the quality of the water was sub-standard due to ongoing upgrades. Should Day Zero come for Makhanda west, all of Makhanda will operate on the Kleynhans system and will be provided with two days of water at a time. Mpahlwa said that water trucks would then be dispatched to areas without water for those two days. Groenewald was hopeful, stating that the plan was to find existing boreholes and “marry them with existing infrastructure”. Once water is sited it will be tested for yield and chemistry to determine if it would be a sustainable and healthy source for Makhanda. If there is useable water from these boreholes but not connection available to main infrastructure, the borehole will act as a spring for residents to collect from. Groenewald emphasised that examining existing boreholes in Makhanda (Grahamstown) and cleaning them properly was a priority. “If you know what you’re doing, Grahamstown sits on some of the best aquifers in the country”, he said. He added that Gift of the Givers can supply Makana with bulk water (note this water is not treated) for the Waainek Water Treatment Works. The bulk water would come from boreholes located close to the Waainek and would be processed through the plant. Groenewald emphasised grave concern for Makana’s drought should March see no sufficient rainfall. By 6.30pm the Gift of the Givers team had drilled a considerable depth into Witteberg Quartzite opposite the Waainek plant. Groenewald said they would continue drilling early tomorrow until a depth of 146 metres, before moving on to other sites. Tomorrow morning Groenewald and the drilling team will continue to explore and clean pre-existing boreholes and hope to drill new ones. Grocott’s Mail will be updated of this process and our reporters will be on the scene, hopefully bringing our readers news and photographs of spouting water. Gift of the Givers hydrologist Gideon Groenewald looks on as his team drills into the Witteberg Quartzite on Mountain Drive late this afternoon. Photo: Sue Maclennan  