Eastcape Midlands College students protest outside the City Hall on Thursday 7 February. Management on Monday 11 February met the students to discuss their grievances. Photo: Azlan Makalima By AZLAN MAKALIMA AND SUE MACLENNAN Eastcape Midlands College student leader Sabelo Madlala says a meeting with management and students of Eastcape Midlands College in the City Hall Monday 11 February, facilitated by Makana Mayor Mzukisi Mpahlwa, was productive. The students have been protesting outside the Makhanda (Grahamstown) campus daily since Thursday 7 February, when they marched to the City Hall. Last Friday and today they burned rubbish outside the main gates. Their demands, as listed in a document dated 4 February and elaborated on by Sasco convener at the campus Sabelo Madlala, include registration anomalies, a lack of transport for late classes, queries about NSFAS funding, the status of the SRC, alleged shortages of textbooks, lecturers, toilets, toilet paper, computers and internet. They demanded that management meet them to hear their grievances. On Friday, they stopped bakkies with trailers full of rubbish collected by Makana Revive and individual residents during the ongoing strike, to throw on to a pile of burning material at the gate. Students take bags of rubbish from the back of a bakkie on Friday 8 February, for a fire at the entrance to Eastcape Midlands College. Photo: Sue Maclennan South African Further Education and Training Student Association (Safetsa) Deputy President Yonke Twani met with the students on Thursday 7 February. He explained the students’ grievances to Grocott’s Mail. “Students informed us that the information they are getting from the school [about their]status contradicts the information they get from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS),” Twani said. While their records at the institution indicated they weren’t funded, NSFAS had informed them they were bursary recipients funded for the 2019 academic year. “Many of them are not [local], and they are frustrated because they need a place to stay, and to pay for tuition,” Twani said. “Even those who are funded tell us they’re rejected by private landlords because of the [College’s alleged record] of not paying landlords once a lease agreement has been signed.” The failure to pay for private accommodation meant students had nowhere to stay, Twani said. “Our frustration as Safetsa, is that students are unable to engage with the management to come with better solutions.” Twani said the protests would delay learning and teaching and that accommodation and allowances should have been addressed by now.  On Friday, EMC commented, “Eastcape Midlands TVET College is aware of protesting students at the Grahamstown Campus. Management has met with members of the Student Representative Council at its Head Office in Uitenhage on Thursday 7 February and is currently dealing with issues raised to find amicable solutions. Feedback will be provided to all students on Monday 11 February 2019.” Spokesperson Elmari van der Merwe said last week that members of the Executive Management would visit the Grahamstown Campus on Monday 11 February 2019 to engage with students in order to resolve concerns. Around 30 students, staff and management were meeting with Mpahlwa in the Council Chamber at the City Hall this afternoon at 3.15pm. Madlala afterwards said the meeting had been successful and agreement was reached on all issues. “On accommodation, management assisted by students will look for suitable accommodation in town. And the college said they would engage taxi drivers to provide a service after late classes.