Grahamstown Round Table 11 members hit Makhanda CBD’s most popular TGIF spot on Friday night, 19 July, to publicise their Winter Knights collection campaign. Launched on Thursday 18 July 2019, the campaign will run for the duration of Mandela Month until 18 August. On Friday evening, New Street passers-by and Rat & Parrot patrons greeted the group of Round Tablers with concern. As the temperature rapidly plummeted towards the minus-1 predicted for the next morning, at least two of them wore short-sleeved T-shirts in the biting wind. “That’s the point,” said Grant Gordon. “The whole point is raising awareness about the cold, and raising resources to help people deal with it.” Winter Knights is a national alliance project of Round Table Southern Africa (RTSA) where Round Tables from across the country collect second-hand clothing, blankets, and non-perishable foods for people most affected by the cold of winter. The sundowner hour picket outside the Rat & Parrot on New Street to raise public awareness and support was the Grahamstown Round Table 11 (RT11)’s first campaign event. The Rat & Parrot Restaurant have been long-time supporters of RT11 and the Winter Knights project. Manager of the Rat & Parrot, Dudu Nyakotyo, also a member of RT11 and the Public Relations Officer for the service organisation, expressed his enthusiasm for the project and noted the positive impact he had seen. “It is heart-warming to know that people experience a real benefit from the work we do collecting clothing and blankets,” Nyakotyo said. He urged people in the Makhanda community to reach into their cupboards and find old clothing, shoes, and blankets that are no longer in use and to drop them off at one of the designated Collection Points across the city. “Just ten minutes of clearing out your cupboard for any clothing you have not worn in six months can bring comfort and warmth to children, families, and the elderly.” Project Convenor and Chairman for Grahamstown Round Table 11, Greg Wilmot, announced the first batch of Collection Points where community members can deliver items for donation. “We have secured six initial Collection Points across the city to maximise our effort and impact. “The support of local businesses and the community at large have been crucial to the success of this project in the past and we are hoping to have an even greater impact with this year’s drive,” Wilmot said. The first six Collection Points are located at the following venues:
Frontier Brokers – Somerset Street
IT Solutions – African Street
Beer Properties – New Street
Graeme College – Templeton Drive
Sirenskyscraper Dance Studio – Rautenbach Road
Just Property – Peppergrove Mall Wilmot noted that he hopes to secure more Collection Points as the collection campaign gains momentum. Should you have any questions and need further information, please do not hesitate to contact the Rt11 Chairman and Project Convenor at: greg@wilmotpsychology.co.za or 072 264 1452 Please visit the Grahamstown Round Table 11 Facebook Page for more information: https://www.facebook.com/Grahamstown-Round-Table-No11-570751109768472/6228